# Day 12

## Challenge

### Part 1

Tracking the four largest moons: Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto.

After a brief scan, you calculate the position of each moon (your puzzle input). You just need to simulate their motion so you can avoid them.

Each moon has a _3-dimensional position (x, y, and z)_ and a _3-dimensional velocity_. The position of each moon is given in your scan; _the x, y, and z velocity of each moon starts at 0_.

Simulate the motion of the moons in time steps. _Within each time step_, _first update the velocity of every moon_ by applying gravity. Then, once all moons' velocities have been updated, _update the position of every moon by applying velocity_. Time progresses by one step once all of the positions are updated.

To apply gravity, _consider every pair of moons_. On each axis (x, y, and z), the velocity of each moon changes by exactly +1 or -1 to pull the moons together. For example, if Ganymede has an x position of 3, and Callisto has a x position of 5, then Ganymede's x velocity changes by +1 (because 5 > 3) and Callisto's x velocity changes by -1 (because 3 < 5). However, _if the positions on a given axis are the same_, the velocity on that axis does not change for that pair of moons.

Once all gravity has been applied, _apply velocity_: simply add the velocity of each moon to its own position. For example, if Europa has a position of x=1, y=2, z=3 and a velocity of x=-2, y=0,z=3, then its new position would be x=-1, y=2, z=6. This process does not modify the velocity of any moon.

Then, it might help to calculate the _total energy in the system_. The total energy for a single moon is its _potential energy multiplied by its kinetic energy_. A moon's _potential energy_ is the _sum of the absolute values of its x, y, and z position coordinates_. A moon's _kinetic energy_ is the _sum of the absolute values of its velocity coordinates_. 

### Part 2

Find how many steps it takes for the moons to return to a previous state (both positions and velocities). This can take a long time so brute force will not necessarily work.

- Figure out if there are patterns in the changes? 
- How often does an individual moon return to a previous position? Maybe the result is the product of the individual cycles?

Example 1: 2772 steps to return to original position
Example 2: 4686774924 to return to a previous position (not the original?)

Part 2: 362375881472136

Determine cycles for each coordinate independently i.e. after how long do all the x coordinates and x velocities match that starting position and velocity again (calc for x, y and z). Take the minimum of each of the dimensions' frequencies (since we collected all frequencies), and calculate the Least Common Multiple (LCM) of the three numbers.

## Learnings

LCM (least common multiple):

- has a numpy implementation (`np.lcm`), but this produces wrong results for large numbers
- can be calculated using the `math.gcd` function (GCD = greatest common denominator):

```python
def _lcm(a, b):
    return a * b // math.gcd(a, b)

result = _lcm(_lcm(x_freq, y_freq), z_freq)
```