# Day 19

## Challenge

### Part 1

It's another Intcode challenge!

The program uses _two input instructions_ to request the _X_ and _Y_ position to which the drone should be deployed. Negative numbers are invalid and will confuse the drone; _all numbers should be zero or positive_.

Then, the program will _output_ whether the drone is _stationary (0)_ or being _pulled by something (1)_. For example, the coordinate X=0, Y=0 is directly in front of the tractor beam emitter, so the drone control program will always report 1 at that location.

_How many points are affected by the tractor beam in the 50x50_ area closest to the emitter? (For each of X and Y, this will be 0 through 49.)

Part 1 answer: 213

### Part 2

You aren't sure how large Santa's ship is. You aren't even sure if you'll need to use this thing on Santa's ship, but it doesn't hurt to be prepared. You figure _Santa's ship might fit in a 100x100 square_.

The beam gets wider as it travels away from the emitter; you'll need to be a minimum distance away _to fit a square of that size into the beam fully_. (Don't rotate the square; it should be aligned to the same axes as the drone grid.)

In this example, the 10x10 square closest to the emitter that fits entirely within the tractor beam has been marked O. Within it, the point closest to the emitter (the only highlighted O) is at X=25, Y=20.

_Find the 100x100 square closest to the emitter that fits entirely within the tractor beam_; within that square, _find the point closest to the emitter_. What value do you get if you take that point's X coordinate, multiply it by 10000, then add the point's Y coordinate? (In the example above, this would be 250020.)

Idea:
- convert grid to numpy array
- for each entry with a 1, calculate the sum of the x*x square, if it equals all 1s (n * n for side length n), we have found a matching square.
- to find the closest to the emitter, calculate distance to 0,0 (sqr(dx^2 + dy^2))

**THIS TAKES TOO LONG!!!!**

Next idea:
- calculate the angle between left beam and y axis, and right beam and y axis
- calculate left and right beam x coordinates for y in range(100000) (numpy)
- calculate width of beam (right - left) (numpy)
- for y that has width > square_side, calculate if (y-n, left_x) and (y-n, right_x) are in beam
    - arctan2(x_left, y-n) >= phi_left AND arctan2(x_right, y-n) <= phi_right
- Stop on the first we find.

This doesn't work either:
- calculate vectors / angles based on first 100 results
- calculate left and right side of beam, and see where first 99 difference between bottom left and top right occurs
- seems to be off by a few - probably due to rounding

This didn't work - I think taking the reading from y = 100 to determine the angles was not far away enough. Should have taken the angle from y = 10000? Also the left and right beam seem to have different rounding applied (e.g. floor() for left side and ceiling() for right side?)

There must be a trigonometric way to calculate this just based on the angles between right and left beam:
- This is a system of equations for calculating bottom left x/y and top right x/y
- Resolve by substituting all variables for y on bottom left

But we can use it as a good approximation where the squares have to lie
- good starting guesses are y = 1066, x = 850 for the top left, and y = 1165, x = 850 for bottom left

Write a function that runs intcode for two parameters and returns the output value. We can use this to check coordinates, starting with bottom left (maybe use a range of 3 - start x-3, then run until we find the left side), then check if the top right is still in the beam.

**This worked!!**
y = 987, x = 783, result = 7830987

## Learnings

None really, part 1 was easy and part 2 didn't require any new tricks...