# Day 9

## Challenge

### Part 1

4th appearance of `intcode` machine.

Parameters in `relative` mode.

Parameters in mode 2, relative mode, behave very similarly to parameters in position mode: the parameter is interpreted as a position. Like position mode, parameters in relative mode can be read from or written to.

The important difference is that relative mode parameters don't count from address 0. Instead, they count from a value called the _relative base_. The _relative base starts at 0_.

The address a relative mode parameter refers to is itself plus the current relative base. When the relative base is 0, relative mode parameters and position mode parameters with the same value refer to the same address.

For example, given a relative base of 50, a relative mode parameter of -7 refers to memory address 50 + -7 = 43.

The relative base is modified with the relative base offset instruction:

Opcode 9 adjusts the relative base by the value of its only parameter. The relative base increases (or decreases, if the value is negative) by the value of the parameter.

### Part 2

Takes a much longer time to run (ca 5 minutes), and apparently breaks recursive code, but since my solution is running with a `while` loop, no problem. No modification required from part 1.

## Learnings

The big difference to the intcode machine from day 5 / 7 was to rewrite the `get_params` function so it returns address pointers and not memory itself. Returning memory itself is fine if only used for reading, but since we now can also write to relative addresses using the relative mode, I had to change the code to return relative addresses only and then adjust all opcode methods to reference memory at the relative addresses. Worked fine afterwards!

The intcode computer is now complete and will not require modifications.