# Day 24

## Challenge

### Part 1

Eris isn't a very large place; a scan of the entire area fits into a 5x5 grid (your puzzle input). The scan shows bugs (#) and empty spaces (.).

Each _minute_, The bugs live and die based on the number of bugs in the _four adjacent tiles_:

- A bug _dies_ (becoming an empty space) _unless there is exactly one bug adjacent to it_.
- An empty space becomes _infested_ with a bug _if exactly one or two bugs are adjacent to it_.

Tiles on the edges of the grid have fewer than four adjacent tiles; the missing tiles count as empty space.

This process happens in every location _simultaneously_; that is, within the same minute, _the number of adjacent bugs is counted for every tile first, and then the tiles are updated_.

To understand the nature of the bugs, _watch for the first time a layout of bugs and empty spaces matches any previous layout_. 

To calculate the _biodiversity rating_ for this layout, consider each tile left-to-right in the top row, then left-to-right in the second row, and so on. Each of these tiles is worth biodiversity points equal to _increasing powers of two: 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, and so on_. Add up the biodiversity points for tiles with bugs; in this example, the 16th tile (32768 points) and 22nd tile (2097152 points) have bugs, a total biodiversity rating of 2129920.

**What is the biodiversity rating for the first layout that appears twice?**

This is a game of life type exercise.

- read in the input
- count adjacent bugs for each tile
- generate new state
- compare to all previous states (we can use just the sum of the powers of two for this, which is also the biodiversity score)

**part 1: 32506764**

### Part 2

Same principle, but now the middle of each 5x5 grid is a another 5x5 grid etc. 

We start at level 0, the one on the outside is level -1, the one on the inside is level 1. 

Neighbors work differently - to the outside (-1 level), the tiles outside of the 5x5 grid are just single tiles. On the inside (middle tile), tiles who have the middle tile as neighbors have 5 tiles from the middle tile as neighbors.

**Starting with your scan, how many bugs are present after 200 minutes?**

- need a dictionary of levels - store the level in here if it has bugs on it. (use a defaultdict)
- middle tile is special, as are neighbors:
    - neighbors to the middle tile get a new set of neighbors, the 5 tiles on the next layer + 1
    - neighbors on the outside get a new set of neighbors, 1 tile on the next layer - 1

Living / dying is the same - that means, we count the number of adjacent bugs all at once, and then calculate each tile individually. So the order of which levels we process does not really matter. Maybe this doesn't need recursion. Just walk through the dictionary of layers and process the ones that have bugs on it, plus the ones +1 and -1 to see if new bugs move to new layers.

**Part 2 result: 1963**

## Learnings
