# Day 25

## Challenge

### Part 1

This droid can follow basic instructions and report on its surroundings; you can communicate with it through an _Intcode_ program (your puzzle input) running on an _ASCII-capable computer_.

As the droid moves through its environment, it will describe what it encounters. When it says _Command?_, you can give it _a single instruction terminated with a newline (ASCII code 10)_. Possible instructions are:

- _Movement_ via `north`, `south`, `east`, or `west`.
- To _take_ an item the droid sees in the environment, use the command `take <name of item>`. For example, if the droid reports seeing a `red ball`, you can pick it up with `take red ball`.
- To _drop_ an item the droid is carrying, use the command `drop <name of item>`. For example, if the droid is carrying a green ball, you can drop it with `drop green ball`.
- To get a _list of all of the items_ the droid is currently carrying, use the command `inv` (for "inventory").

Santa's ship is a Reindeer-class starship; these ships use pressure-sensitive floors to determine the identity of droids and crew members. The standard configuration for these starships is for all droids to weigh exactly the same amount to make them easier to detect. _If you need to get past such a sensor, you might be able to reach the correct weight by carrying items from the environment._

Look around the ship and see if you can **find the password for the main airlock.**

#### Items
131 - Starting with items: ('weather machine', 'spool of cat6', 'antenna', 'mug')

== Pressure-Sensitive Floor ==
Analyzing...

Doors here lead:
- west

A loud, robotic voice says "Analysis complete! You may proceed." and you enter the cockpit.
Santa notices your small droid, looks puzzled for a moment, realizes what has happened, and radios your ship directly.

"Oh, hello! You should be able to get in by typing **805307408** on the keypad at the main airlock."


### Part 2

## Learnings
