# Day 22

## Challenge

### Part 1

Deal space cards (numbered from 0 to 10006).

Three techniques:

Deal into new stack:
- Reverse the order of cards from top to bottom to bottom to top (e.g. 0 1 2 3 4 becomes 4 3 2 1 0)

Cut `n` cards:
- take the top N cards off the top of the deck and move them as a single unit to the bottom of the deck, retaining their order.
- e.g. cut 3 cards:
    Top          Bottom
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

    becomes

    3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2

- this can be done with negative values as well: In that case, cut (the absolute value of) N cards from the bottom of the deck onto the top


To deal with increment N:
- start by clearing enough space on your table to lay out all of the cards individually in a long line.
- Deal the top card into the leftmost position. 
- Then, move N positions to the right and deal the next card there.
- If you would move into a position past the end of the space on your table, wrap around and keep counting from the leftmost card again.
- Continue this process until you run out of cards.

Puzzle:
After shuffling your factory order deck of 10007 cards, what is the position of card 2019?


#### Parsing the file

Types of lines:

- deal with increment 7
- deal into new stack
- cut -2

each with positive or negative numbers (except for 'deal into new stack', no number).

Find key words in line:
- if "increment" in line - find number
- if "cut" in line - find number
- if "new" in line - no number

Use regex to find number.

**card 2019 is at: 6850**

### Part 2

New deck: factory order deck of 119315717514047 space cards.
You decide to apply your complete shuffle process (your puzzle input) to the deck 101741582076661 times in a row.

After shuffling your new, giant, factory order deck that many times, what number is on the card that ends up in position 2020?

#### Ideas:

- shuffle deck of cards 1 time
- see what result is at position 2020
- shuffle a few more times, see if card at 2020 repeats? Find a cycle?

This requires some complex maths (modulo arithmetics, modular inverse, exponential functions). See [here](https://github.com/twattanawaroon/adventofcode/blob/master/2019/q22b.py) for a sample code and [here](https://www.reddit.com/r/adventofcode/comments/ee0rqi/2019_day_22_solutions/?sort=confidence) in the post from etotheipi1.

#### Solution from mcpower_ on reddit solution thread.

- express each deck as two numbers:
    - offset - first number of the deck
    - increment - difference between two adjacent numbers
    - All numbers are `mod (number of cards in deck)`

- getting the nth number in the deck is offset + increment * n
- Starting deck is (offset, increment) = (0, 1)

Then card operations can be expressed as:

Deal into new stack:
- reverse the list:
    - numbers should now decrease by increment, so negate increment
    - new first number is the former last number, so increase the offset by the new increment (actually decrease, but since the increment is now negative, we decrease)

    increment *= -1
    offset += increment

Cut n cards:
- shift the list
    - increment stays the same
    - offset is increased by n * increment (which represents the value of the nth card)

    offset += n * increment

Deal with increment:
    - offset (the first card) doesn't change
    - increment is the difference between the 0th (offset) and the new 1st card. 
        - 0th new card is the old 0th card
        - 1st card goes to 1 * nth (mod MOD)
        - 2nd card goes to 2 * nth (mod MOD)
        - ith card goes to i * n (mod MOD)th card
        - When is is i*n = 1? Divide both sides by n to get `i = n^(-1)`
        - Calculate the modular inverse of n mod MOD -- n^(MOD - 1) = 1, so can calculate n^(MOD - 2) (due to Fermat's theorem?)
        - So now we know that the second card in the new list is n^(-1) in the old list. Hence the difference (new increment) is:
            offset + increment * n^(-1) - offset = increment * n^(-1)
        - Therefore, multiply increment with n^(-1)
        - In Python, this is 
            increment *= inv(n)
        - where inv(n) = pow(n, MOD - 2, MOD)


That's the formulas for the shuffle. How do we repeat a shuffle a number of times?

**Part 2 13224103523662**

I ended up copying the [solution from gengkev](https://github.com/gengkev/adventofcode-2019/blob/master/22/solve.py), which uses a similar way, but uses matrix multiplication. This runs superfast and has the right solution for parts 1 and 2. 



## Learnings
