# Day 14

## Challenge

### Part 1

You just need to know how much ORE you'll need to collect before you can produce one unit of FUEL.

Each reaction gives specific quantities for its inputs and output; reactions cannot be partially run, so only whole integer multiples of these quantities can be used. (It's okay to have leftover chemicals when you're done, though.) For example, the reaction 1 A, 2 B, 3 C => 2 D means that exactly 2 units of chemical D can be produced by consuming exactly 1 A, 2 B and 3 C. You can run the full reaction as many times as necessary; for example, you could produce 10 D by consuming 5 A, 10 B, and 15 C.

Suppose your nanofactory produces the following list of reactions:

10 ORE => 10 A
1 ORE => 1 B
7 A, 1 B => 1 C
7 A, 1 C => 1 D
7 A, 1 D => 1 E
7 A, 1 E => 1 FUEL

1 FUEL = 7 A + 1 E = 7 A + 1 * 7 A + 1 * 1 D = 14 A + 1* 7 A + 1* 1 C = 21 A + 7 A + 1 B = 28 A + 1 ORE = 30 ORE + 1 ORE = 31 ORE

The first two reactions use only ORE as inputs; they indicate that you can produce as much of chemical A as you want (in increments of 10 units, each 10 costing 10 ORE) and as much of chemical B as you want (each costing 1 ORE). To produce 1 FUEL, a total of 31 ORE is required: 1 ORE to produce 1 B, then 30 more ORE to produce the 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 = 28 A (with 2 extra A wasted) required in the reactions to convert the B into C, C into D, D into E, and finally E into FUEL. (30 A is produced because its reaction requires that it is created in increments of 10.)

**part 1: 522031**

#### Different implementations and their processing time

I tried different implementations of the substitution algorithm and timed how long they take on the input.

1) original implementation (prioritizing clean substitutions)

This uses a layer model of the graph (distance from ORE), which is generated once recursively. The main algorithm then processes the recipe as a list, manually adding up amounts of the same element. It first substitutes all 'clean' substitutions, i.e. ones without any remainder. Only if it doesn't find any clean substitutions does it use the layer model to lookup the next substitution that is closest to FUEL.

Surprisingly fast although it uses a lot of list comprehensions to find the next substitution, generate the updated recipe etc.

This runs fastest so far:
Time elapsed: 0.006935834884643555 (ca 7 ms)
Average duration after 1000 runs: 0.005904886722564697 (ca 6 ms)

2) Layers with a heapq

Using the same layer model (generated once), this uses a heapq (prioritized sorted list) to draw the next element for substitution, using the layer model. It does not prioritize clean substitutions.

This uses a heapq and a defaultdict for the needed amounts.

This takes slightly longer for an individual run, but much less for multiple runs (probably to load `import heapq`, which happens only once): 
Time elapsed: 0.1698930263519287 (ca 170 ms)
Average duration after 1000 runs: 0.061164628744125364 (ca 61 ms)


3) Layers with a list (instead of a heapq)

Again, using the layer model, this works the same as 2) but uses a normal list instead of the heapq and looks up priority from the layer dictionary.

This takes only slightly longer than 2) (if adding `import heapq`, it takes 300ms)
Time elapsed: 0.1874537467956543 (ca 190 ms)
Average duration after 1000 runs: 0.15425534892082216 (ca 155 ms)

4) Topological sort (using a normal list)

Implemented a pure topological sort, using a successor graph and working through Kahn's algorithm (processing successors and adding to queue if no successors for a node).

This runs very fast, even faster than 1):
Average duration after 1000 runs: 0.0004999113082885743 (ca 0.5 ms)

### Part 2

Given 1 trillion (1_000_000_000_000) units of ORE, how much fuel could we produce?

for Ex 3, (13312 ORE per Fuel), 82892753 FUEL units
for Ex 4, (180697 ORE per FUEL), 5586022 FUEL units
for Ex 5, (2210736 ORE per FUEL), 460664 FUEL units

Easiest solution is to run the Fuel generation algorithm multiple times but not with FUEL = 1 quantity, and see how many ORE are needed to produce the quantity of FUEL. We can then use binary search to find the FUEL amount that can be produced with 1 tril ORE.

**part 2: 3566577 fuel produced with 999999976525 ORE**

## Learnings

use a generator in a list comprehension to access multiple elements of a split:

```python
# prepare input recipe
inputs = [(x[1], int(x[0])) for x in (i.split(' ') for i in inp.split(', '))]
```

Topological sort is quickest to find the right sequence of substitutions (see topological search in Advent of Code cheatsheet).

Binary search to zero in on a target value (see Advent of Code cheatsheet).