# Rotation and Transformation matrix

[Spatial Transformation Matrices](https://www.brainvoyager.com/bv/doc/UsersGuide/CoordsAndTransforms/SpatialTransformationMatrices.html)

# Numpy

Rotation matrix:

```python
R1 = np.eye(4)
R1[0, 0] = -1
R1[2, 2] = -1

R1
array([[-1.,  0.,  0.,  0.],
       [ 0.,  1.,  0.,  0.],
       [ 0.,  0., -1.,  0.],
       [ 0.,  0.,  0.,  1.]])
```

Translation matrix:

```python
T = np.eye(4)
T[:3,3] = [68, -1246, -43]

T
array([[ 1.000e+00,  0.000e+00,  0.000e+00,  6.800e+01],
       [ 0.000e+00,  1.000e+00,  0.000e+00, -1.246e+03],
       [ 0.000e+00,  0.000e+00,  1.000e+00, -4.300e+01],
       [ 0.000e+00,  0.000e+00,  0.000e+00,  1.000e+00]])
```

Multiplying a column vector with the rotation and then translate:

```python
a = np.array([[686, 422, 578, 1]])

R1.dot(a)
T.dot(R1.dot(a))
```

Applying rotation to multiple column vectors and subtract from another column vector:

```python
b0 = np.array([[[-618, -824, -621,    1]],
       [[-537, -823, -458,    1]]])

b1 = np.array([[[686, 422, 578,   1]],
       [[605, 423, 415,   1]]])

for x, y in zip(b0, b1):
    print(x.T - R1.dot(y.T))
```

# Ideas to reduce run time

Original solution:

Part 2: Max distance: 13327
Pair: (12, 9)
Elapsed time to run part1: 3.52828 seconds.
Part 1: 390

## Where is the inefficiency?

Not in BFS:

Observation by commenting out the BFS part:
- all the time is spent in the uppper part before the BFS. The runtime after commenting out the BFS is still 3.5s.
- Inefficiencies must be in the upper part, hence probably concentrated in ideas 
       - 1 (beacons from class to list)
       - 2 (reduce number of rotations from 48 to 24)
       - 4 (reduce number of sampled beacon pairs to determine the rotation from 12 to 2 or 3)

Not in the `find_scanner_coords` method 

Commented out everything from `find_scanner_coords` down (which uses the 48 permutations of rotations):
- Run time is still 3.5s

Run time is spent in the `find_matching_beacons` part.

## 01. Change beacons from class to a simple list
## 02. Reduce number of rotations / directions from 48 to 24
## 03. Use a numpy transformation matrix to apply translation and rotation to beacons (combine transformations, apply only once)
## 04. Reduce number of sampled beacon pairs to determine the rotation from 12 to 2 or 3?

## 05. Change BFS to DFS

No noticeable impact - rejected!

Part 2: Max distance: 13327
Pair: (12, 9)
Elapsed time to run part1: 3.55217 seconds.
Part 1: 390

## 06. Reduce matching beacons from all pairs to combinations

At the moment, the double loop that compares all beacon patterns between all scanners compares pairs twice:
- s, t
- t, s

This can be reduced by only comparing combinations instead of a double loop.

In this case, we have to create the reverse dictionary entries in the next part for t/s as we might need the reverse translation later.

Reducing from full product of all scanners to just combinations of two scanners, run time reduced by half.

Part 2: Max distance: 13327
Pair: (12, 9)
Elapsed time to run part1: 1.77061 seconds.
Part 1: 390